src/writings/chapter-fleeting-time.md, before:

#Fleeting Time

##(OPTIMIZING TIME)

GON:
Alright, so I was reading about machine gambling in Vegas[^schull] and I saw lots of parallels to the internet. Check it out: machine gambling developers are always trying to optimize the time people stay on their device. It doesn't even matter how much they win / lose. As long as they keep coming and come for long amounts of time, these companies keep gaining. 

The crazy thing is that it does not stop there. They are all-inclusive strategies. Using the architecture of the casinos, the layout of the city. It all contributes to this magical abbreviation: T.O.D., _Time On Device_.

The same thing happens in the design of user interfaces.[^magic] The slot machine comparison can be seen almost literally in some apps. What prize is behind this button? How many likes do I get when I post this? Everything is slot-machinized.

REN:  
So you can call social media an addiction?

OPT:  
It is tricky to call it an 'addiction' because it still is a social network. Would you say you're addicted to your friends?

GON:  
No, but I would say some media have been made so tempting to use that it's almost impossible not to. 

OPT:  
I think you should see this. It's called _Time Well Spent_[^well] It is a design movement that claims they want to align technology with our humanity. These people recognize the problem that our media is trying to claim our attention and they offer some solutions.

They make a division between ‘attention’ companies and ‘platform’ companies. The attention companies are for instance Facebook, YouTube, Snapchat and Netflix and the platformers are companies such as Google and Apple. The former needs to maximize attention to make money, the latter are builders of the interfaces and goods that sit between these networks and us. 

The attention companies profit from our screentime, so they won't change. While the platformers should be the party that benefits users more than companies since they are the moderators of the interactions we have with technologies.

All the time we are being distracted we have the feeling that it's our own mistake, but it's easy to forget that attention companies have hundreds of employees working for them that are called 'Growth Hackers.' 

There are a lot of strategies they use to maximize your attention, which will gain them profits. These strategies are very invasive, and make very conscious abuse of some concepts from psychology and science behind addiction and distraction.

GON:  
If you come to see it from this perspective, the whole internet seems pretty awful. All big services are using these kind of techniques! But I have to say there is a kind of dark pleasure in binging out on things like Netflix or Youtube. I have to go in sometimes and not come out for a while. Everything is shiny, everything smiles, there are rewards everywhere, why wouldn't I like that? It gets in the way of working or studying, but sometimes that's exactly what I want.

REN:  
Well, in my early days I would also spend entire days messing with a PC and a program, trying to hook all things up. That took most of my time and I could get lost in it, but there was still a personal responsibility, I had to cooperate with the computer to get where i wanted to get. I don't know. I think designers should just follow their own perspectives and personalize these things much more. If you ask me there is just not enough diversion. we've put the responsibility to answer all of our questions with GAFAM even though we've always known they're big corporations. Stop whining about that their services suck, of course they'r annoying, they are trying to sell you something. 

> Life is pain, princess, anyone trying to tell you differently is trying to sell you something  
> Farmboy[^farmboy]

OPT:  
Sure, that may be the case. But the point is not if an individual makes that choice or not. The point here is that everyone has to deal with these media. And they're not based on the best interests of their users. And when we might transition to some new kind of media, it would be best if we keep in mind these destructive patterns for people. The new architecture of systems should be free of these disgusting addiction hooks.

Protecting people's time is as important as things like privacy.

Look, I'm just pleading for Time Well Spent because they make a good point. Their aim is to develop a more intentional relationship to our devices. The solutions put forward by _Time Well Spent_ are pretty straightforward. Time Well Spent is going towards design that does 'well' to people. They use their knowledge of Google and other companies to make a suggestion for improvement.

REN:  
Well, looking at their site, they offer apps to solve problems with apps. Semi-solutions to real problems. Relying on tech for tech. That does not solve the original problem, it is a way out.

OPT:  
I think that's easy to say. The hard thing is how do you deal with these things while still on the media? I'm using Selfcontrol[^selfcontrol] sometimes. It blocks access to pages I enter in my blacklist.

GON:  
Moment[^moment] is the mobile version of that. Crazy how you can see all of those tech companies supporting that tool, right? It's pretty strange.

OPT:  
😂. I love these. Have you seen the Distractagone? That one might actually work.

REN:  
No I haven't. Can you explain?

OPT:  
The Distractagone is just a cube-shaped vault with a timer on it. It allows you to keep your phone locked inside for an X period of time. And during that time you are undistracted! It sounds like a great idea, Gonzo sarcastically put forward. But isn't this a forced solution? It's like hiding candy from children. That's never stopped them from taking the candy if they really wanted it. 

GON:  
Yeah, I think that's a very important thing to stress. No matter how many tools and thingamajingeys you use, if you are sensitive to these impulses you don't stand a chance against yourself. I mean, I'm using this Selfcontrol thing on a schedule. That means I can never go on Facebook but hell, I also installed a proxy so I can go there anytime anyways. I'm a sad fuck!!! haha.

OPT:  
I talked to Charlie Stigler, the guy that coded Selfcontrol[^stigler]. It seems fitting that he himself does not have any problems dealing with the problems a lot of people report from the attention companies. He says it himself, he doesn't have problems with self-control, he just has it. 

REN:  
Yeah, and still he did make this app. That's great. I think there is a bottom line here, that says make what you make well, and then people might pick it up. ! And he listened to the call of people who were struggling.

[^schull]: Natasha Dow Schüll, _Addiction by Design_, Princeton University Press, 2012

[^magic]: Tristan Harris, _How Technology Hijacks People's Minds – from a Magician and Google's Design Ethicist_, [https://medium.com/swlh/how-technology-hijacks-peoples-minds-from-a-magician-and-google-s-design-ethicist-56d62ef5edf3#.qo18sc6z2](https://medium.com/swlh/how-technology-hijacks-peoples-minds-from-a-magician-and-google-s-design-ethicist-56d62ef5edf3#.qo18sc6z2)

[^well]: Time Well Spent, [http://www.timewellspent.io/](http://www.timewellspent.io/)

[^selfcontrol]: _Selfcontrol_ , [https://selfcontrolapp.com/](https://selfcontrolapp.com/)

[^moment]: _Moment_ [https://inthemoment.io/](https://inthemoment.io/)

[^stigler]: Interview With Charlie Stigler. Full text available upon request. Mail manusnijhoff@gmail.com

[^farmboy]: Farmboy is a main character in the movie _The Princess Bride_ [http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0093779/](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0093779/)

<footer></footer>

Commit message:

Commit before home going. Time for coffee and work on ch. 1 and 2

src/writings/chapter-fleeting-time.md, after:

#Fleeting Time

Optimo calls social media addictive. Gonzo doesn't want to accept, the Renegade backs Optimo up.

##(OPTIMIZING TIME)
 
> Why insist that the changes are over? Artists who begin with the proposition that the phenomena of their world are boring and banal, who begin with an exasperated sigh, are going to produce art that is boring and banal, art that produces exasperated sighs.  
> — Brian Droitcour [^droitcour]


OPT:
Alright, so I was reading about machine gambling in Vegas[^schull] and I saw lots of parallels to the internet. Check it out: machine gambling developers are always trying to optimize the time people stay on their device. It doesn't even matter how much they win / lose. As long as they keep coming and come for long amounts of time, these companies keep gaining. 

The crazy thing is that it does not stop there. They are all-inclusive strategies. Using the architecture of the casinos, the layout of the city. It all contributes to this magical abbreviation: T.O.D., _Time On Device_.

The same thing happens in the design of user interfaces.[^magic] The slot machine comparison can be seen almost literally in some apps. What prize is behind this button? How many likes do I get when I post this? Everything is slot-machinized.

REN:  
So you can call social media an addiction?

OPT:  
Yes

GON:  
No, but I would say some media have been made so tempting to use that it's almost impossible not to. 

OPT:  
I think you should see this. It's called _Time Well Spent_[^well] It is a design movement that claims they want to align technology with our humanity. These people recognize the problem that our media is trying to claim our attention and they offer some solutions.

They make a division between ‘attention’ companies and ‘platform’ companies. The attention companies are for instance Facebook, YouTube, Snapchat and Netflix and the platformers are companies such as Google and Apple. The former needs to maximize attention to make money, the latter are builders of the interfaces and goods that sit between these networks and us. 

The attention companies profit from our screentime, so they won't change. While the platformers should be the party that benefits users more than companies since they are the moderators of the interactions we have with technologies.

All the time we are being distracted we have the feeling that it's our own mistake, but it's easy to forget that attention companies have hundreds of employees working for them that are called 'Growth Hackers.' 

There are a lot of strategies they use to maximize your attention, which will gain them profits. These strategies are very invasive, and make very conscious abuse of some concepts from psychology and science behind addiction and distraction.

GON:  
If you come to see it from this perspective, the whole internet seems pretty awful. All big services are using these kind of techniques! But I have to say there is a kind of dark pleasure in binging out on things like Netflix or Youtube. I have to go in sometimes and not come out for a while. Everything is shiny, everything smiles, there are rewards everywhere, why wouldn't I like that? It gets in the way of working or studying, but sometimes that's exactly what I want.

REN:  
Well, in my early days I would also spend entire days messing with a PC and a program, trying to hook all things up. That took most of my time and I could get lost in it, but there was still a personal responsibility, I had to cooperate with the computer to get where i wanted to get. I don't know. I think designers should just follow their own perspectives and personalize these things much more. If you ask me there is just not enough diversion. we've put the responsibility to answer all of our questions with GAFAM even though we've always known they're big corporations. Stop whining about that their services suck, of course they'r annoying, they are trying to sell you something. 

> Life is pain, princess, anyone trying to tell you differently is trying to sell you something  
> Farmboy[^farmboy]

OPT:  
Sure, that may be the case. But the point is not if an individual makes that choice or not. The point here is that everyone has to deal with these media. And they're not based on the best interests of their users. And when we might transition to some new kind of media, it would be best if we keep in mind these destructive patterns for people. The new architecture of systems should be free of these disgusting addiction hooks.

Protecting people's time is as important as things like privacy.

Look, I'm just pleading for Time Well Spent because they make a good point. Their aim is to develop a more intentional relationship to our devices. The solutions put forward by _Time Well Spent_ are pretty straightforward. Time Well Spent is going towards design that does 'well' to people. They use their knowledge of Google and other companies to make a suggestion for improvement.

REN:  
Well, looking at their site, they offer apps to solve problems with apps. Semi-solutions to real problems. Relying on tech for tech. That does not solve the original problem, it is a way out.

OPT:  
I think that's easy to say. The hard thing is how do you deal with these things while still on the media? I'm using Selfcontrol[^selfcontrol] sometimes. It blocks access to pages I enter in my blacklist.

GON:  
Moment[^moment] is the mobile version of that. Crazy how you can see all of those tech companies supporting that tool, right? It's pretty strange.

OPT:  
😂. I love these. Have you seen the Distractagone? That one might actually work.

REN:  
No I haven't. Can you explain?

OPT:  
The Distractagone is just a cube-shaped vault with a timer on it. It allows you to keep your phone locked inside for an X period of time. And during that time you are undistracted! It sounds like a great idea, Gonzo sarcastically put forward. But isn't this a forced solution? It's like hiding candy from children. That's never stopped them from taking the candy if they really wanted it. 

GON:  
Yeah, I think that's a very important thing to stress. No matter how many tools and thingamajingeys you use, if you are sensitive to these impulses you don't stand a chance against yourself. I mean, I'm using this Selfcontrol thing on a schedule. That means I can never go on Facebook but hell, I also installed a proxy so I can go there anytime anyways. I'm a sad fuck!!! haha.

OPT:  
I talked to Charlie Stigler, the guy that coded Selfcontrol[^stigler]. It seems fitting that he himself does not have any problems dealing with the problems a lot of people report from the attention companies. He says it himself, he doesn't have problems with self-control, he just has it. 

REN:  
Yeah, and still he did make this app. That's great. I think there is a bottom line here, that says make what you make well, and then people might pick it up. ! And he listened to the call of people who were struggling.

[^schull]: Natasha Dow Schüll, _Addiction by Design_, Princeton University Press, 2012

[^magic]: Tristan Harris, _How Technology Hijacks People's Minds – from a Magician and Google's Design Ethicist_, [https://medium.com/swlh/how-technology-hijacks-peoples-minds-from-a-magician-and-google-s-design-ethicist-56d62ef5edf3#.qo18sc6z2](https://medium.com/swlh/how-technology-hijacks-peoples-minds-from-a-magician-and-google-s-design-ethicist-56d62ef5edf3#.qo18sc6z2)

[^well]: Time Well Spent, [http://www.timewellspent.io/](http://www.timewellspent.io/)

[^selfcontrol]: _Selfcontrol_ , [https://selfcontrolapp.com/](https://selfcontrolapp.com/)

[^moment]: _Moment_ [https://inthemoment.io/](https://inthemoment.io/)

[^stigler]: Interview With Charlie Stigler. Full text available upon request. Mail manusnijhoff@gmail.com

[^farmboy]: Farmboy is a main character in the movie _The Princess Bride_ [http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0093779/](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0093779/)

<footer></footer>
